Logging doc (#10672)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/logging.adoc

import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.Produces;
import javax.ws.rs.core.MediaType;

@Path("/hello")
public class ExampleResource {

    private static final Logger LOG = Logger.getLogger(ExampleResource.class);

    @GET
    @Produces(MediaType.TEXT_PLAIN)
    public String hello() {
        LOG.info("Hello");
        return "hello";
    }
}
----

=== What about Apache Log4j 2 ?

link:https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/[Log4j 2] is a logging implementation, it contains a logging backend and a logging facade.
Quarkus uses the JBoss Log Manager backend, so you will need to include the `log4j2-jboss-logmanager` library to route Log4j 2 logs to JBoss Log Manager.

[source,xml]
----
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.jboss.logmanager</groupId>
      <artifactId>log4j2-jboss-logmanager</artifactId>
    </dependency>
----

You can then use the Log4J 2 API inside your application.

WARNING: do not include any Log4j 2 dependencies, the `log4j2-jboss-logmanager` library includes what's needed to use Log4j 2 as a logging facade.

NOTE: if you still use the legacy Log4j version 1, you need to use `log4j-jboss-logmanager` instead.

== Logging levels

> JBoss logging support the link:https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/logging/Level.html[standard JDK log levels] (in descending order):

Reviewer: These levels should be de-emphasized.  The levels we expect users to use and care about are `FATAL`, `ERROR`, `WARN`, `INFO`, `DEBUG`, and `TRACE` - aka the Apache standard levels.  The JUL levels should be the footnote.

Author: Just read your detailed explaination on the issues about log levels, I'll update the documentation to emphasize the Apache levels.

Author: Done

All the logging configuration will then be done inside your `application.properties`.

== Supported Logging APIs

Applications and components may use any of the following APIs for logging, and the logs will be merged:

* JDK `java.util.logging` (also called JUL)
* https://github.com/jboss-logging/jboss-logging[JBoss Logging]
* https://www.slf4j.org/[SLF4J]
* https://commons.apache.org/proper/commons-logging/[Apache Commons Logging]

Internally Quarkus uses JBoss Logging, you can also use it inside your application so that no other dependencies should be added for your logs.

[source,java]
----
import org.jboss.logging.Logger;

import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.Produces;
import javax.ws.rs.core.MediaType;

@Path("/hello")
public class ExampleResource {

    private static final Logger LOG = Logger.getLogger(ExampleResource.class);

    @GET
    @Produces(MediaType.TEXT_PLAIN)
    public String hello() {
        LOG.info("Hello");
        return "hello";
    }
}
----

NOTE: If you use JBoss Logging but one of your libraries uses a different logging API, you may need to configure a link:#logging-adapters[Logging Adapter].

> === What about Apache Log4j 2 ?

Reviewer 2: To me this section reads in a bit convoluted way. Maybe just title it "What about Apache Log4j ?", then:
- Introduce both 1 & 2 are supported but require different extra depency
- Show current dependency example of 2 (since it's more common use case), and use a callout to show log4j 1 dependency. So no need for the NOTE below.

Author: I was not very found of this section neither. I refactor it as you suggested.

link:https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/[Log4j 2] is a logging implementation, it contains a logging backend and a logging facade.
Quarkus uses the JBoss Log Manager backend, so you will need to include the `log4j2-jboss-logmanager` library to route Log4j 2 logs to JBoss Log Manager.

[source,xml]
----
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.jboss.logmanager</groupId>
      <artifactId>log4j2-jboss-logmanager</artifactId>
    </dependency>
----

You can then use the Log4J 2 API inside your application.

WARNING: do not include any Log4j 2 dependencies, the `log4j2-jboss-logmanager` library includes what's needed to use Log4j 2 as a logging facade.

NOTE: if you still use the legacy Log4j version 1, you need to use `log4j-jboss-logmanager` instead.

== Logging levels

JBoss Logging supports Apache style logs levels:

> - **FATAL**: A critical service failure/complete inability to service requests of any kind. *It has a higher order than **SEVERE**.*

Reviewer 2: You could use descriptive list here and the list below (https://asciidoctor.org/docs/user-manual/#description-list) with `horizontal` style. THe final appearance is very similar to what it's written and more semantycally accurate.

Author: I didn't kow this type of list, try it and I do think it looks better, thanks for the suggestion.

This guide explains logging and how to configure it.

Internally, Quarkus uses JBoss Log Manager and the JBoss Logging facade. +
You can use the JBoss Logging facade inside your code as it's already provided,
or any of the supported Logging API listed in the next chapter as Quarkus will send them to JBoss Log Manager.

All the logging configuration will then be done inside your `application.properties`.

== Supported Logging APIs

Applications and components may use any of the following APIs for logging, and the logs will be merged:

* JDK `java.util.logging` (also called JUL)
* https://github.com/jboss-logging/jboss-logging[JBoss Logging]
* https://www.slf4j.org/[SLF4J]
* https://commons.apache.org/proper/commons-logging/[Apache Commons Logging]

> Internally Quarkus uses JBoss Logging, you can also use it inside your application so that no other dependencies should be added for your logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Internally Quarkus uses JBoss Logging; you can also use it inside your application so that no other dependencies should be added for your logs.
```

[source,java]
----
import org.jboss.logging.Logger;

import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.Produces;
import javax.ws.rs.core.MediaType;

@Path("/hello")
public class ExampleResource {

    private static final Logger LOG = Logger.getLogger(ExampleResource.class);

    @GET
    @Produces(MediaType.TEXT_PLAIN)
    public String hello() {
        LOG.info("Hello");
        return "hello";
    }
}
----

NOTE: If you use JBoss Logging but one of your libraries uses a different logging API, you may need to configure a link:#logging-adapters[Logging Adapter].

=== What about Apache Log4j ?

> link:https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/[Log4j] is a logging implementation, it contains a logging backend and a logging facade.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
link:https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/[Log4j] is a logging implementation: it contains a logging backend and a logging facade.
```

Quarkus uses the JBoss Log Manager backend, so you will need to include the `log4j2-jboss-logmanager` library to route Log4j logs to JBoss Log Manager.

[source,xml]
----
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.jboss.logmanager</groupId>
      <artifactId>log4j2-jboss-logmanager</artifactId> <1>
    </dependency>
----

> <1> This is the library needed for Log2J version 2, if you use the legacy Log4J version 1 you need to use `log4j-jboss-logmanager` instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> This is the library needed for Log2J version 2; if you use the legacy Log4J version 1 you need to use `log4j-jboss-logmanager` instead.
```

You can then use the Log4J API inside your application.

> WARNING: Do not include any Log4j dependencies, the `log4j2-jboss-logmanager` library includes what's needed to use Log4j as a logging facade.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WARNING: Do not include any Log4j dependencies. The `log4j2-jboss-logmanager` library includes what's needed to use Log4j as a logging facade.
```

== Logging levels

> JBoss Logging supports Apache style logs levels:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JBoss Logging supports these Apache-style log levels:
```

> JBoss Logging supports these Apache-style log levels:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are the log levels used by Quarkus:
```

[horizontal]

> FATAL:: A critical service failure/complete inability to service requests of any kind. *It has a higher order than **SEVERE**.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FATAL:: A critical service failure/complete inability to service requests of any kind. *It has a higher order than `java.util.logging`'s **SEVERE** level (see below).*
```

Author: In fact I can remove this as now the Apache style are introduce first and when SEVERE is introduce it is desribed as having the same order as ERROR.

Author: I forget to commit this one. This is done now.

ERROR:: A significant disruption in a request or the inability to service a request.
WARN:: A non-critical service error or problem that may not require immediate correction.
INFO:: Service lifecycle events or important related very-low-frequency information.
DEBUG:: Messages that convey extra information regarding lifecycle or non-request-bound events which may be helpful for debugging.
TRACE:: Messages that convey extra per-request debugging information that may be very high frequency.

> JBoss logging also supports link:https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/logging/Level.html[JDK log levels]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, the following levels may be configured for applications and libraries using link:https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/logging/Level.html[`java.util.logging`]:
```

> JBoss logging also supports the link:https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/logging/Level.html[standard JDK log levels]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JBoss logging also supports link:https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/logging/Level.html[JDK log levels]:
```

[horizontal]

> OFF:: Special level to turn off logging.

Reviewer: I would put this with the list up above.

Author: Done

SEVERE:: Same as **ERROR**.
WARNING:: Same as **WARN**.
CONFIG:: Service configuration information.
FINE:: Same as **DEBUG**.
FINER:: Same as **TRACE**.
FINEST:: Event more debugging information than `TRACE`, maybe with even higher frequency.

> ALL:: Special level for all messages including custom levels.

Reviewer: And this one up above as well.

Author: Done

== Runtime configuration

Run time logging is configured in the `application.properties` file,

> for example to set the default log level to `INFO` logging and include Hibernate `DEBUG` logs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for example, to set the default log level to `INFO` logging and include Hibernate `DEBUG` logs:
```

|quarkus.log.level|INFO|The default minimum log level for every log category.
|===

> The root logger configuration is used when no configuration exists for a given logger category.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no level configuration exists for a given logger category, the enclosing (parent) category is examined. If no categories are configured which enclose the category in question, then the root logger configuration is used.
```

== Logging Format

> By default, Quarkus uses a **String** logging format that format a log event in a simple text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Quarkus uses a pattern-based logging formatter that generates human-readable text logs.
```

Author: I forget to commit this suggestion, this is done now.

> You can configure this logging format for each log handler via a dedicated property,
> for the console handler it will be the `quarkus.log.console.format` property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure the format for each log handler via a dedicated property.
For the console handler, the property is `quarkus.log.console.format`.
```

Author: We should said `You can configure the pattern` but the configuration is called format and we don't have configuration alias to easily change this without breaking compatibility ...

Reviewer: That's OK; I think either way is understandable.

> The **String** logging format supports the following symbols:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The logging format string supports the following symbols:
```
I'd stick with the original text here.

later analysis.

[id="json-logging"]
==== JSON Logging Format

> In order to configure JSON logging format, the `quarkus-logging-json` extension may be employed.  Add this extension to your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to configure the JSON logging format, the `quarkus-logging-json` extension may be employed.  Add this extension to your
```

NOTE: Printing the details can be expensive as the values are retrieved from the caller. The details include the
source class name, source file name, source method name and source line number.

== Log Handlers

> A log handler is a logging component responsible to emits log events to a recipient. +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A log handler is a logging component responsible for the emission of log events to a recipient.
```

Quarkus comes with three different log handlers: **console**, **file** and **syslog**.

=== Console log handler

> It is enabled by default, it outputs all log events inside the console of your application (stdout).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The console log handler is enabled by default.  It outputs all log events to the console of your application (typically to the system's `stdout`).
```

> For details of its configuration options, see link:#quarkus-log-logging-log-config_quarkus.log.console[Console logging configuration reference].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For details of its configuration options, see link:#quarkus-log-logging-log-config_quarkus.log.console[the Console Logging configuration reference].
```

=== File log handler

> It is disabled by default, it allows to output all log events inside a file on the application's host.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The file log handler is disabled by default. It outputs all log events to a file on the application's host.
```

It supports log file rotation.

> For details of its configuration options, see link:#quarkus-log-logging-log-config_quarkus.log.file[File logging configuration reference].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For details of its configuration options, see link:#quarkus-log-logging-log-config_quarkus.log.file[the File Logging configuration reference].
```

=== Syslog log handler

> link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syslog[Syslog] is a protocol for sending log messages on Unix-like systems defined by the link:https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5424[RFC5424].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syslog[Syslog] is a protocol for sending log messages on Unix-like systems using a protocol defined by link:https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5424[RFC 5424].
```

> The syslog handler allows to send all logs events to a syslog server (by default, on the local syslog server). +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The syslog handler sends all log events to a syslog server (by default, the syslog server that is local to the application).
```

It is disabled by default.

> For details of its configuration options, see link:#quarkus-log-logging-log-config_quarkus.log.syslog[Syslog logging configuration reference].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For details of its configuration options, see link:#quarkus-log-logging-log-config_quarkus.log.syslog[the Syslog Logging configuration reference].
```

quarkus.log.category."io.undertow.request.security".level=TRACE
----

> NOTE: as we don't change the root logger, console log will only contains `INFO` or higher order logs.

Reviewer 2: I think most admonitions start with capital. Regardless of style I think it should be consistent.

Author: Done

quarkus.log.category."io.undertow.request.security".level=TRACE
----

> NOTE: As we don't change the root logger, console log will only contains `INFO` or higher order logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: As we don't change the root logger, console log will only contain `INFO` or higher order logs.
```

Caused by java.lang.ClassNotFoundException: org.apache.commons.logging.impl.LogFactoryImpl
----

> This is due to the logging implementation not being embarked in the native executable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is due to the logging implementation not being included in the native executable.
```
